---
title: mental
layout: default.liquid
---

# Knowledge derived from "You are not a Rock" by Mark Freeman

Guide your actions through values, not on feelings to avoid or pursue.

## Not your mind

Most of our lives spring from reactions to thoughts that come to our minds.
However, it is important to realize that it is not possible to control the
thoughts that the mind creates, as it is an independent entity. Then, it follows
that trying to control its behaviour is utterly useless and that we should not
blindlessly follow its choices. What must we do then? Accept the thoughts as
internal experience; as you feel pain, as you feel pleasure. And then, act
according to your values.

<em> — A disturbing thought came upon me! It tells me to rethink a conversation
I just had, then it tells me to re-listen an audio message I sent. And now to
judge people based on its clothes.<br>

— It is obvious that your mind wants to do those things. After all, you have
trained it all your life to do so. But now you have the choice, you have become
empowered. Will you chase after her, or invest your time wisely?.</em>

It is yours the decision to engage in compulsions to avoid feelings of boredom,
anxiety, uncertainty and impatience. Nonetheless, it is yours too, to accept
(not trying to suppress) those feelings which the mind generates to protect you,
and commit to actions which spring from wisely selected values and beliefs.
Briefly stated, to achieve freedom from the slavery of the mind.

PD: It must be noted, that meditation is a critical practice which allows one to
become an adept at recognizing the thoughts and distractions the mind throws at
us, viewing them with curiosity. After all, it's the mind, not you.

## Quotes

<q>You can pour the rest of your life into trying not to be anxious and trying
to prevent your worries from coming true, and all you'll have done is focused
your energy on things that didn't even happen and you didn't even want to think
about</q>

<q>If you hand over control of your value to others, expect them to waste it.
They won't know you've put them in charge of the only thing you own.</q>

<q>When you are caught up in the practice of mindlessness, death becomes very
frightening because you are actually aware of moving close and closer to the end
of the life you could have had</q>

<q>The more you control, the more you must control</q>

## Definitions

- **Mental health** : learning to handle feelings you do not like, while taking
  action in alignment with your values.

- **Compulsion** : anything you do to cope with, check on, or control
  uncertainty, anxiety and other feelings you don't like.

- **Mindfulness** : the awareness that arises through paying attention on
  purpose in the present moment-non-judgmentally.

- **Controlling** : trying to prevent experiences we do not like.

- **ACT** : _Accept_ your reactions and be present. _Choose_ a valued direction.
  _Take_ action.

- **Cognitive diffusion** : therapy to recognize the stuff in your head is stuff
  you experience. Not you.

## Meditations

The mind can pay attention at one thing at a time. Choose that 'one thing'
wisely.

Meditation, to experience thoughts <strong>without judgment</strong> or
attachment, but curiosity.

Worse mental health investing your time into non-valuable things.

Ask yourself: How would I define myself based on the actions done today?

Compulsions arise good feelings, teaching brain feel bad to feel good.

Actions, separate from thoughts and emotions, act according to values while
experiencing thoughts.

Checking compulsions train your brain to find more uncertainties.

If needed to check to feel safe. A <strong>prerequisite</strong> for feeling
safe is feeling unsafe.

Do not stop using X to avoid compulsions, use it as you would like to use it.

You do not have to answer every preoccupation the brain throws at you.

If you are present while doing things, the necessity to check disappears.

Your brain might throw thoughts or judgements to you, recognize that and act as
you value. Your thoughts are not you, you cannot control them.

Introduce **fantasy** elements in your thoughts to be aware of their discrepancy
with reality.

It is normal to experience physical symptoms after withdrawing from a
compulsion.

When living life based off your values, there is a constant need to ask
constantly how you are <strong>creating your life</strong>.

When making decisions regarding values, the benefits of saying no become much
clearer.

Dress as an expression of myself, not as an attempt to avoid fears or control
over other people. (we identify by what we buy)

You may see your past as happy, but remember that your past habits are what lead
you to this point.

It is not that you do not have time, but that you spend it on things you do not
care about deeply.

Practice non-judgement; learn to judge when you want to, not when the mind tells
you.

Notice the judgments your mind creates; are they based in evidence? are they
true?

Happiness practice; actions that make you happy in the long term, not now.

Functioning; do what matters to you, whatever you are feeling.

Cultivating happiness is a practice. Through gratitude. At any moment.

Obsessions and fears are not true; only in your mind.

Embrace uncertainties, love them. Do not chase after them.

Experience your thoughts, cut compulsions, change systems, act on values.

Mental health; the same as physical fitness.

Barriers:

- Believing you are unique
- Trying to get understanding
- Systems of compulsions not dismantled
- Avoiding relapse

Everyone faces similar mental health challenges. We are humans.

## Exercises

### The inventories

- **Description** : write how you currently spend your energy and time in a day.
  Then write how you would want to spend a day one year from now (or more).

- **Questions** : what compulsions have you eliminated from your life? What
  healthy activities have you introduces? What activities are only a tiny piece
  of your current inventory but grow to a more significant portion of your ideal
  inventory?.

### Everyday mindfulness

- **Description** : practice mindfulness while doing everyday tasks. Such as
  cleaning, cooking or walking.

- **Examples** : (1) Walking without obsessing with things in your head. (2)
  When talking with others just focus on listening without judging or worrying
  of what you have to say. (3) See something without planning a million other
  things in your head. (4) Open your senses to the meal you are cooking ,
  recognize the work that went to the food.

### Meditate

Better described in [meditation](meditation.html).

### Follow your values

- **Description** : Articulate your values. Make sure you can edit them, they
  will evolve.

- **Examples** : valuing people for their character not for their clothes.
  avoiding harm to others (including animals and earth).

### The Hierarchy

- **Description** : Write a ranked list of compulsions from easiest to hardest.
  Cut out one each week. Add one activity you want to do more of.

- **Examples** : avoiding my boss, procrastinating by using social media,
  boredom binge eating.

### Take a compulsion journey

- **Description** : write what happened that day before the compulsion started.
  Identify the cue that started it. Prevent it from happening.

- **Questions** : What did you do right before you started engaging in the
  compulsion? Why were you in the place where you engaged in the compulsion? How
  did your emotions change throughout the day? How did other people affect you?
  What facilitated the compulsion? What happened yesterday that affected today?

### The awesome schedule

- **Description** : check values and ideal inventory. Commit to doing once per
  month an activity that you do for its own sake.

- **Questions** : What do you wish you did more often? What do you always enjoy
  doing?

### Checking challenges

- **Exercises** : send message without re-reading it. don't check if people are
  looking at you. Don't check your reflection.

### The five whys

**Description** : pick one compulsion and ask: Why would it be bad to stop doing
that?

**Examples** : why would it be bad to stop rereading messages? Because i cannot
be certain what they truly mean. Why would it be bad not to know what the
messages truly mean? ...

### Practising possibility

**Description** : to be able to imagine things going well and going bad. imagine
fantastical scenarios to practice cognitive diffusion.

**Examples** : worried because going to an island. Imagine yourself riding with
dolphins to get there.

### Annoying kids in a car

**Description** : imagine you are in a car with toddlers in the backseats
screaming at you. You follow your GPS to the destination (guided by your values)
and try to enjoy the ride while hearing the toddlers scream. You cannot reason
with the toddlers. You cannot do anything to them. But hey cannot do anything to
you.

**Notes** : practice that when your brain starts catastrophizing or throwing
anxieties and compulsions.

### The switch list

**Description** : divide a peace of paper or a spreadsheet. On the left hand
side write fear-based and on the right value-based. List compulsions that
include behaviors you'll keep in your life.

**Example** : avoiding city because i need to get away from it all --> living in
a place optimal for doing the things I value

### Practice feeling not right

**Description** : do things you do not feel like doing.

**Example** : respond to a message when you do not feel like responding.

### Make your beliefs visible

**Description** : articulate your beliefs, make them tangible. Then do things
with them (filter between opinions ans facts, which are under my control...)

**Examples** : I am valued if I get compliments

### Non judgement

**Description** : go to a busy place, notice what pops into your head. Can you
see people without judging them? Can you see their actions as actions without
attaching extra labels?

**Questions** : Can you prevent the judgement that triggers the feelings you do
not like? When you judge things, can you choose to do something you value
instead of engaging in a compulsion and giving up control of your life to that
judgement?

### Loving-kindness meditation

**Description** : bring to mind something that makes you happy in a meditation
session. bring to mind something you hate, practice non.judgement, show
kindness. Then show kindness toward yourself.o

### What's on your path?

**Description** : have a map of behaviours so you know when you are drifting
from your health.

**Instructions** : three columns. 1st column(tha path): what are you going to do
each day to be healthy and happy and work toward your goals in life?. 2 nd
column (off the path): thing that you consider misaligned with who you are and
where you want to be in life. 3rd column (just off the path): actions that set
you up to going off way.

**Examples** : on the path (volunteering) just off the path (procrastinating on
cleaning) way off the path (lying to people)
